Nordic Electricity Market Intelligence & Price Forecasting Platform

An AI-driven electricity market analytics and forecasting platform built using real Finland day-ahead electricity pricing data from the ENTSO-E Transparency Platform. This project focuses on electricity market trend analysis, electricity price forecasting, volatility detection, and market intelligence using machine learning and time-series analytics.

Project Overview

This project analyzes real-world Nordic electricity market behavior using Finland’s electricity pricing data from the ENTSO-E Transparency Platform. The platform performs:

Electricity price trend analysis
Market volatility detection
Time-series analytics
Machine learning-based forecasting
Market behavior visualization

The system demonstrates how AI and data analytics can support electricity market forecasting and energy intelligence systems.

Key Features
Real Finland electricity market data analysis
Day-ahead electricity price forecasting
Time-series analytics and visualization
Market volatility detection
Hourly electricity price analysis
Monthly and seasonal trend analysis
Feature engineering for forecasting
Machine learning model training and evaluation
Interactive Streamlit dashboard
Energy market insights generation
Technology Stack
Programming & Analytics
Python
Pandas
NumPy
Visualization
Matplotlib
Plotly
Streamlit
Machine Learning
Scikit-learn
Random Forest Regressor
XGBoost
Dataset Source
ENTSO-E Transparency Platform
Development Environment
Google Colab
Dataset Information

The dataset was collected from the ENTSO-E Transparency Platform and contains real Finland electricity market pricing data.

Dataset Includes:
Timestamp
Day-ahead electricity prices (EUR/MWh)
Historical electricity market data
High-frequency pricing intervals
Project Workflow
1. Data Collection

Real Finland electricity market pricing data was downloaded from the ENTSO-E Transparency Platform.

2. Data Cleaning & Preprocessing
Removed unnecessary columns
Converted timestamps
Processed electricity pricing data
Handled missing values
3. Feature Engineering

Generated time-based features:

Hour
Day
Month
Weekday
Year
4. Exploratory Data Analysis

Performed:

Electricity price trend analysis
Hourly pricing pattern analysis
Monthly market behavior analysis
Market volatility analysis
5. Machine Learning Forecasting

Trained a Random Forest Regression model to forecast electricity prices using time-based features.

6. Model Evaluation

Evaluated forecasting performance using:

MAE
MSE
RMSE
R² Score
7. Volatility Detection

Detected abnormal electricity price spikes and unstable market periods.

Machine Learning Model
Model Used
Random Forest Regressor
Input Features
Hour
Day
Month
Weekday
Target Variable
Electricity Price (EUR/MWh)
Project Visualizations
Finland Electricity Prices Over Time

Shows real Finland electricity market volatility and long-term price behavior.

Actual vs Predicted Electricity Prices

Compares actual electricity prices with machine learning-based forecasted prices.

Average Electricity Price by Hour

Displays electricity market behavior and peak pricing hours across the day.

Feature Importance

Shows the contribution of different features in electricity price forecasting.

Streamlit Dashboard

The project includes an interactive Streamlit dashboard for:

Electricity market analytics
Forecast visualization
Market volatility monitoring
Interactive filtering and insights
Repository Structure
nordic-electricity-market-forecasting/
│
├── data/
│   └── cleaned_finland_energy_prices.csv
│
├── notebooks/
│   └── electricity_market_analysis.ipynb
│
├── images/
│   ├── Finland Electricity Prices Over Time.png
│   ├── Actual vs Predicted Electricity Prices.png
│   ├── Average Electricity Price by Hour.png
│   └── Feature Importance.png
│
├── app.py
├── README.md
├── requirements.txt
Installation & Setup
Clone Repository
git clone https://github.com/your-username/nordic-electricity-market-forecasting.git
Install Dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
Run Streamlit Dashboard
streamlit run app.py
Applications

This project can be applied in:

Electricity market analytics
Smart grid systems
Energy forecasting
Energy trading analytics
Renewable energy intelligence
AI-driven energy systems
Power systems research
Future Improvements
LSTM deep learning forecasting
Real-time ENTSO-E API integration
Renewable energy impact analysis
Multi-country electricity market comparison
Advanced forecasting models
Live electricity market dashboard deployment
Results

The forecasting system successfully identified electricity market pricing behavior and generated predictive insights using real Finland electricity market data. The platform also detected high-volatility periods and analyzed electricity market trends across multiple time dimensions.

Author

M.Sabda Pyari
B.Tech Electrical Engineering (Computer Science Specialization)
Dayalbagh Educational Institute

References
ENTSO-E Transparency Platform
Scikit-learn Documentation
Pandas Documentation
Streamlit Documentation
Machine Learning for Energy Systems Research
